Can people hear me?
Is the mic turned on?
It's on?
Let me...
Can I clip it down the shirt?
Thank you for your patience.
Cool.
Can people hear me now?
Yes.
I did.
Okay, awesome.
Please bear with me.
I'm kind of breaking a little bit.
I'm following two of my heroes from the industry, and
also I've basically had to completely revise my entire talk on
the fly as a result of the earlier keynote.
So let's do this.
This is about the third-ish time I've given this
talk, but I've done it for completely different audiences the
other two times.
The first time was for a group mostly of publishers in London
at Protocols for Publishers.
The second time was for more of a journalism tech audience,
mostly like journalism consumers, and this one's more for builders
and people who are in this space.
And kind of the idea I'm going to be talking about
is how can journalism start using the tools available in the atmosphere
to start creating its own algorithms, and I'll talk about
why it's important.
First off, a little bit about myself.
I work and have worked in news media since 2013 or so
, but my background has always been kind of journalism and/
or tech kind of on some level.
I moved from Canada to London in 2011.
I also went to the UBC at one point.
It's really cool to be on this campus again.
But I ended up in London.
I currently work at a financial newspaper doing fancy charts mainly.
But I've had bylines in various papers, including Financial
Times, Times and Sunday Times, Economist, Guardian,
etc.
And yeah, so I arrived in kind of like the decentralized
social media space because I find it really interesting in terms of
how do we how can the space be used to present a
idea of journalism that can be seen in ways that are censorship
resistant, that gives publishers more control over how their content is
distributed, etc.
And so I started initially on Mastodon.
I was I created an instance on Mastodon called
foreststate.
media way back in 2018.
I think it was the very first journalism related instance on the
Fediverse.
I might be wrong about that.
Please correct me if I am.
It didn't really go anywhere.
I got maybe like five users and I shut it down literally
the week that Musk took over Twitter.
Which was probably a good move in hindsight.
I kind of, you know, fell out of love with
ActivityPub as a way of distributing journalism because there
's some topographical kind of issues of the network that I
kind of found frustrating and then I, you know, I
got a blue sky invite in 2023 and I really enjoyed being
on the atmosphere.
I built a few different things probably most notably the verified news
feed and also the trending news feed which I'll be talking
about a little bit in a second.
So yeah.
Approaching this from two ways.
AT Pro needs journalists.
I think that journalism is a very core function of any social
media platform.
My theory of change.
You need to have all the following for a effective social media
network that kind of is a center of conversation.
You start with the creatives, the shit posters, the
people who are doing artsy fun things on this brave new
platform that no one's really ever heard of yet.
And, you know, those are kind of like the people
who start the platform, who build interest for it, who
pull interest from other people who will eventually join.
Academics are another big part of a healthy social network.
Seeing all this stuff at AT Science yesterday was just like super
, super cool.
And it's really exciting to see so much work happening kind
of in that space.
Any journalists.
Because journalists talk about what's happening on these platforms, they
are a big part of why they're seen as being socially
relevant.
And journalists kind of follow the creative types eventually.
And following the journalists you also get politicians.
And I see politicians as a big driver of people joining the
social network because people want to talk to their elected representatives.
The elected representatives want to talk to the constituents.
It's important for the health of an ongoing social network.
And then following all those groups, you get celebrities which are
really the kind of draw of like the other 90% of
the social platform.
People like to follow celebrities because they're curious what the people
who they're excited about are.
And like lastly, pornography is also like a really big part
of what makes a healthy social network in my mind.
And I think that, I have an idea for a talking
I've been going to do next year about why I think
that's the case.
But anyways, I'm going to talk specifically about journalism.
And I think that the atmosphere is really important for journalism right
now because right now we have so much of our media ecosystem
influenced by for-profit social networks like Twitter, Facebook,
etc.
and this chart is from Magnitude Media using a data source
called Junkipedia which looks at social media traffic.
And it breaks down the most partisan-leaning political accounts
on X in February.
And, suffice to say, one of those circles is
able to kind of impact the discourse a little bit.
If only, it's a bit bigger is all I'm
saying.
And I guess, you know, kind of why I like
all this stuff interests me is because when I was going to
journalism school back in like 2011 like a huge part of what
you're taught is how do you maintain a Twitter following?
How do you engage with your audience?
How do you use social media for sourcing news coverage?
And that's a big part of the day-to-
day life of journalists.
And my personal belief, and I should mention that, pretty
much everything I'm saying is just completely all just my opinions
.
I'm not reflective of any employer I've ever had.
But my feeling is maybe the reason why the discourse is a
little bit cooked is because the majority of journalists are spending a
huge amount of their time on social networks that both elevate and
incentivize far-right content.
So, AT Pro needs journalists.
But also, I think journalism needs AT Pro.
I think AT Pro solves a lot of the fundamental needs that
you have for social network as a media organization.
And I'll get into a few of those in a second
.
Why I think this is the case.
A lot of these charts are from the Reuters Digital News
Report.
They track something called news avoidance.
And I'm going to show us in three different charts or
different metrics.
This is from the 2024 edition because I couldn't find this
longitudinal kind of data for 2025 yet.
So, this shows the proportion of people who reported using no
sources of news in the last week.
They just completely managed to avoid all the news headlines.
And in the last like 10 years, it's grown by
about like roughly 10%, especially amongst younger age cohorts.
Further, you have the amount of people who are extremely or
very interested in news has declined substantially since 2015.
To a point where the 18 to 24 demographic, only 33
% are extremely or very interested in news.
This is from the 2025 data showing just the breakdown globally of
news avoidance.
40% of all people surveyed are avoiding the news.
It's even bigger in like the younger cohorts.
In the 25 to 34 cohort, a whole 43% of
readers are actively avoiding the news.
So, like, what's driving this?
I kind of feel in some ways that a big part of
it is the way in which algorithms deliver news to readers.
And it's very overwhelming and it prioritizes engagement over news
worthiness or public understanding.
And as a result of that burnout, you have people who
are moving to AI as a primary source of news.
This is the proportion that used AI chat box for news in
the last week.
This is also from the Reuters digital news report.
And it kind of is towards about 10% kind of globally
.
And further, news leaders understand this challenge.
50% think it's going to be like a slow burn
kind of impact on the industry.
And 20% thinks it's going to be the next big
thing.
So, regardless, about 70% of news leaders think it
's going to have an impact on the industry.
And yet, despite all this, social media continues to be
a major source of news.
And in fact, it's growing.
If you look at that orange line, that's the US
.
In 2025, the US joined what Reuters refers to as
the Social First Club, which is countries that where a majority
of people get their news primarily initially from social media.
So, we need to make social work as a place that
people get news.
Because if we don't, then the incumbents will continue
doing so.
And the quality of our discourse will just deteriorate over time
.
This is alluded to in the last talk.
And I'm going to go through it very, very briefly
.
But this is my brief and incomplete recent history of algorithmic
fuckery.
So, this only goes back to 2015.
I'm sure there are more examples that you can use.
And these are just a half dozen I just picked out of
a hat, basically.
But these are the ones that kind of impact me.
Google Accelerated Mobile Pages, AMP is one of
them.
Google said, hey, if you use this new technology that
makes news faster to download and read, we'll boost you
in terms of page rank.
And I think that had a pretty negative effect on the quality
of news that was being served by Google.
As mentioned in the last talk, there was pivot to video
.
And I have another personal kind of connection to this in that
I'm from the generation of journalists who sort of graduated journalism
school while pivot to video was happening.
And it was devastating for an entire generation of journalists.
And I'm not sure it's kind of like the young
core journalists that I've really even fully recovered from at this
point.
In 2022, you have Musk taking over Twitter and depriorit
izing outgoing links, which has had a major impact on news
traffic.
In 2023, you had Facebook blocking Canadian titles because of the
Online Media Act.
Can't get Canadian news on Facebook no more.
And in 2024, you started to see AI overviews start
to become a thing on Google, which has had a really
massive impact on the traffic that news orgs receive from organic
search.
Before this one, I've also added like a 2026
edition.
There's a few more things.
These are kind of like just loosely related.
I know they're not quite on topic with it, but
you had like TikTok being sold to Oracle.
So you have a major upcoming channel for news be sold to
a company for ultimately political reasons in a very politically fraught
moment, I should say.
You also had Congress pressuring Apple News over leftist bias
.
So in both these examples, you have a government that is
pushing technology providers to change how their algorithms work in order to
better align with that regime's interests.
And then just this month, you have Google trialing,
basically replacing human written headlines with AI headlines.
And you also have the superhuman experts controversy where they have
Grammarly effectively had this new feature that they've since
killed where it would offer writing advice from your favorite journalists just
to promise they didn't ask the journalists if they could use
their names.
So basically, I'm trying to get out of all this
.
I'm trying to make a point here.
And my point is ultimately, why do we still trust big
tech with news distribution?
There's lots of reasons why we probably shouldn't at this
point.
Back when I was growing up, my local paper used to
hire people to ride around on bicycles, usually like elementary and
high school students, and chuck papers onto people's front lawn
s.
That was a very core function of the newspaper and it related
to distribution.
Since then, in the internet era, we've basically handed
that entire part of the business to tech companies whose interests are
often not aligned with that of journalism or that of just public
information.
So with that, a couple of questions.
One, wouldn't it be cool if journalism wasn't held
hostage by large tech companies and the billionaires who owned them
?
And furthermore, wouldn't it be cool if journalists and
news orgs had a say in how users discovered news content
?
And lastly, wouldn't it be cool if there was more
transparency about why users are seeing news topics on social media?
At the moment, so much of the way in which news
is delivered to users is basically like an opaque box that you
can't look into and you can't really interrogate and
you don't really know why you're receiving the news.
And furthermore, why is this the news of the day
?
Wouldn't it be cool if we could kind of work to
improve all of these things together?
And to some degree, I think custom feeds are an answer
to that.
And it's one of those things that I think we're
going to have to do some work as builders in the atmosphere
to try and teach newspapers how to use this technology.
Because they can start using it.
They can start building their own algorithms.
They can start serving content to readers in a way that makes
sense for that readership.
They can start doing it today.
And frankly, very few have.
So, these are two feeds I built.
This is probably what I'm best known for.
On the left, you have the OG reverse chronological news
feed, which has about 300-ish odd news orgs
in it.
And on the right, you have the trending news feed,
which is the same but using a very arbitrarily weighted trending
algorithm.
I used to just like chose random numbers for the trending news
feed when I initially like set it up.
And it's been really cool working with some researchers in the
U.
S.
to try to basically A/B test various versions of the
feed with different weights to see which delivers the most user satisfaction
for consuming the news.
And I think it's really interesting.
As somebody who works in the journalism space, who's created
a feed of news for users to then work with researchers to
try and improve the news reading experience for readers, not so
much that increases their engagement or whatever, but so that they
can have a better news reading experience, so they can see
more local news, so they can see more things that are
relevant to them.
Instead of just whatever hot button topic is just wanting to be
pushed in front of them by the major traditional media.
So my news feeds together, we have about 80,000
DAUs, and in the context of, say,
Twitter's discovery feed or a lot of the other big platforms
, 80,000 DAUs, it's not much
.
But to start, it puts it going to be done.
And I think that's a point that we need to start
bringing to news orgs, the fact that you can do
these things now.
This is, and furthermore, you can do things that
, like, you can do it fairly easily.
This is my graze page for the news feed, and
there's a button that I've circled up top saying
remix.
And if you want to create your own version of the feed
, say you want to exclude the onion from it.
The one satirical paper I have in the news feed
is the onion.
I kind of just take it as given that in 2026
you should probably know that the onion is a satirical
paper.
I still have people constantly asking me to remove it, though
.
If you want to, though, you can remix the feed
and remove the onion from it.
There you go.
I would, though.
I love the onion.
Or say you want to change, like, a sorting option
.
Or say you want to make it so that, you know
, image posts aren't allowed.
You can do that.
You can click remix.
It will create a new version of my feed in your account
.
It will still use the same list of orgs and whatnot
And you can then have that as a personalized, improved source
of news.
And similarly, Graze recently released a new feature called,
it effectively uses a similar algorithm to the 4U feed to
find personalized content.
And in, like, five minutes of work, I created
a new version of the feed that is, like, very
personalized to my news viewing habits.
And anybody who uses Graze can just do this.
And news orgs that, you know, create their own
feeds can create different ways in which users can view that content
.
How many of you have per time, by the way?
Sorry.
Okay, cool.
Thank you.
So, yeah.
So these are two examples of, like, ways that news
orgs or feeds could work in a kind of more localized
capacity.
Like, so my two feeds are very, very global.
They're world news orgs, reverse chronological training as
it is.
But you can also do things that are more specific to your
news org and to that audience.
On the left is the Financial Times staff feed, which is
a feed that I may have helped with.
And it's effectively anybody who the Financial Times account follows in
one feed.
And, like, I kind of love it.
Like, I use it, like, myself, like,
on a daily basis.
It's one of the first feeds I check in the morning
.
Because it has all the contributors for the FT, you can
see what are those journalists talking about at a glance in one
place.
And you can pan it to your home screen.
And if you're a reader of that paper and you really
care deeply about what those journalists are talking about or thinking about
, you can see that really quickly.
Similarly, you have Rich Ferro's Minneapolis ICE feed,
which I think is, like, a great example of using
feeds in, like, a hyperlocal context.
Taking a topic that is really relevant to the local community and
taking a combination of news content, local writers, individuals who
are impacted, and putting it into one place.
And I think that there's, like, a lot of
really interesting use cases like this that local news can do.
But maybe part of the problem that why I haven't really
seen a lot of examples like this is just because they're
not really aware of this technology.
And so with that, I think, you know, a
big part of what we need to do as builders is sort
of popularizing this technology and trying things and just building feeds
.
And, you know, whether it's using Graze or
, like, Surf is also really, really exciting.
I mentioned Graze a lot, but Surf is super,
super cool.
I've been playing with that a little bit.
I love the interface for it.
The new thing they mentioned earlier could also be cool.
But, like, ultimately there are many, and there's
also, like, yeah.
So, but anyways, there's a lot of routes to
create custom feeds now.
And I think, you know, I would encourage people to
just start building things.
If you don't have a source of news that you need
on AT Proto, just build it.
You can just do things and share with people and tell people
about it and tell them why it's useful because it's
kind of up to us to popularize this technology because at
the moment it's kind of hard to find.
It's kind of not exactly obvious for people who are new
to blue sky or to the atmosphere more generally.
Why should media orcs create custom feeds?
Because it connects their journalists with their audience.
If you make one for your paper, like the FT Staff
ord I mentioned, you can give them this very close kind
of, like, summary of everything that your journalists are talking
about, which, again, if you're a subscriber,
you might care about.
If you have multiple verticals, for instance, you can
use a custom feed to unify them into one place.
And so even if you have multiple accounts or publishing various other
places, you can consolidate them into, like, a singular
feed.
You can also highlight top content.
You can use pin posts to do promotions or to, like
, highlight a particular editorial kind of, like, campaign or
something of that nature.
One thing I would really like to see is custom feeds being
used as a way of promoting, say, subscription deals.
Say you have a subscription sale going on.
You could use a rotating post to just put a little note
being like, "Hey, do you want to see this
content without a paywall?
Buy a subscription over here." There's lots of cool things
that, like, a news org could do with a custom
feed that maybe they're sleeping on and you need to tell
them about.
And most importantly, all this stuff is, like, kind
of free to use.
It doesn't require a huge capital outlay from a news
org, most of which are increasingly cash-strapped,
to be able to try these things and to do these things
.
And one thing also that I would love to see is journalism
societies start to use custom feeds.
Not just newspapers, but kind of the civil society organizations around
journalism.
So, like, in the UK we have the NU
J, which is the National Union of Journalists.
And we also have IPSO, which is one of our
many press regulators.
These are organizations that are kind of connected with journalism but don
't produce a lot of journalism themselves quite often.
They can use some of these technologies to do really cool things
.
Say you're, like, a union of journalists, right
?
You do your yearly renewal and you send out your form,
"Hey, are you still a practicing journalist?
Where are you at?
Could I get some details, updates?" You've got a
form saying, "What is your Blue Sky Handle?"
And then suddenly you have a big database of all of the
journalists in your organization who have Blue Sky Handles, put
them onto a custom feed, and suddenly you have a really
good source of, like, independent journalism from the journalists who
are either working at titles or are freelance.
One of the, I think, biggest kind of things that
, like, I wish the news feed could do better would
be to surface freelance journalists and surface individual contributors kind of in
that space.
I kind of bolted the idea of, you know,
verifying every single journalist who came to me on Blue Sky
asking if you add to a feed.
So I didn't really do an individual journalist feed.
It would be really easy if you're, like, you
know, a journalist union, for instance.
And there's lots of, kind of, various things you
could do with that.
You could, here's a wild idea.
Say, like, you're a journalism org, like the
NUJ, like I mentioned, and you get a
trusted verifier status.
Suddenly you can verify independent journalists who are working, might not
have access to the verification facilities that, like, a major
newspaper would have.
I think there's, like, a lot of tools for
specifically independent titles and for small publishers that the atmosphere provides that
we really need to start talking to news orgs about.
Because it can really change how they do things and really kind
of improve some of the, you know, give them more
traffic and be able to use the platform better.
Another point that I've been trying to make a little bit
over the last little while is I kind of feel increasingly that
journalism in 2026 is more than just reportage.
It's not simply taking view from nowhere, reporting the facts
journalism all the time.
A lot of the time, like, in my mind in
some ways as doing journalism in 2026 means helping the audience
navigate this news climate.
Steve Bannon in 2016 had the expression filling the, filling
the zone with shit.
Which is basically the idea of creating so much just nonsense in
the press that people don't really know where to focus or
know where to, like, focus their attentions on.
And I think kind of some of those slides earlier talking about
news avoidance is a good indication that that strategy has been
kind of successful.
So how do we as creators and builders and how do we
also as journalists start to use these tools to start unpacking
the zone?
I've had a few ideas.
On the left you have xBlock which is probably,
I think it's Blue Sky's longest running third party lab
eler.
I built this back in, I think, 20, 24
?
And it's been running ever since then.
It labels screenshots from social media platforms, whether it be Twitter
or Blue Sky itself or threads or whatever.
I need to really train the model because it's basically labeling
most things as Twitter right now, but it works.
And I think people find it very, very useful as a
way of kind of turning down the volume on their social media
experience.
By not seeing screenshots dunking from Twitter, they're able
to have a kind of, like, cleaner, less emot
ive sort of social media experience.
And kind of like, you know, my experience with x
Block has informed two new labelers that I've created
.
They're very much in development.
They're a little bit trash right now.
Be forewarned if you, like, subscribe to
them.
But I'm working on them.
They're a work in progress and I'll explain what they
are.
In the middle you have Media Ownership Labeler.
I have this big list of all the titles in the news
feed and I've tried to manually go through and figure out
what their funding model is.
Whether they're independently funded or whether they have, like,
a big corporate owner, like, say, Condé Nast
or something like that.
Or whether they're, like, reader supported.
And what it allows you to do, it allows you to
do two things.
First thing is you can have just, like, a little
badge on every news title saying, like, what their funding
model is.
So if you're just scrolling the news feed and you're
kind of curious, you can see that.
The cool thing is if you want to block all of R
upert Murdoch's papers, you can do that
.
The last one is News Classifier.
And this is, like, an idea that I've had
for, like, a really long time.
I've wanted to find a way of classifying the content
being emitted by the news feed.
It uses -- and I only actually managed to figure out how
to do this.
This idea has been circling in my head for about,
like, a year now.
But I only managed to figure out how to do it about
a fortnight ago.
This is kind of driven by getting a lot of requests for
kind of get the news feed but without sports.
Or the news feed without entertainment.
And it's kind of hard because news orgs publish all
genres of content under, like, the same account name.
So I have a very, very light BERT text classification
model that's looking at the OG tags of news orgs
, or news posts that are being emitted by the news feed
.
And it tries to add a label to them, which is
used for downstream tooling.
Say you want to create a version of the news feed without
sports, you can do that pretty easily using Graze.
It uses Contrails, which is a Graze feature
that gives you, like, a web socket of all the
content being emitted by a particular custom feed.
And it makes the infrastructure side of it, like, a
lot easier to deal with.
Okay.
I think that's it.
Thank you.
If you want to try remixing the news feed, gra
ze.
social/feed/396.
Again, encourage everyone to, like, try and create their
own news sources and try and, like, use this technology
to create a better understanding of news.
I'm open to questions if anyone has them, but I
'm in trouble answering questions.
Hi.
Excellent.
Okay.
So we have a few minutes to answer some, or to
take some questions.
Do you have a question?
All right.
Matt.
Thanks, Henry.
Quick question.
What do you think about permissioned data and what that offers
?
Perhaps new subscription products?
Maybe bundled subscription products?
So people can subscribe to a custom feed and get content that
they wouldn't find on, like, on the main,
on the open.
I don't know, a subscription product, basically, that
could be sold.
Could you actually generate revenue for news organizations?
So, like, kind of, like, yeah, so
I think a big part of it is, like, the
private data story for AT Proto.
Like, until there's, like, more, you know
, private data, I think, will facilitate more, and
, like, permissioned data, I think is how they
're referring to it, will facilitate that kind of thing a
lot better.
There's already some stuff you can do with Graze.
Excuse me.
I think Graze has, like, some kind of,
like, Patreon integration.
I'm not entirely sure how that works.
But I think the idea with that is to be able to
post into the feed you need to be a Patreon subscriber.
So it's kind of like a subscriber feed.
And so I think there are kind of things like that that
, you know, could be useful approaches.
Again, though, like, the lack of permission data kind
of makes it challenging to do subscribers-only sort of stuff
, I think, kind of on the platform.
Hello.
I have a question around -- so we would love to work
with more newsrooms, journalists, all of it.
And I think one of the difficult things that we have when
we're messaging to them, and maybe you can help me
with, is that -- and I haven't worked with news
rooms, so this is mostly from, like, indie publishers
, maybe on Substack, like, that kind of thing
.
That reach is really everything.
Like, it has to get you more views.
If it does that, everything else kind of is good.
Well, maybe not good, but fine.
And the atmosphere ecosystem is not yet at a scale where I
can promise someone, like, 2x views or anything like
that.
But all this feed stuff is incredible.
So how do I talk about that in a way that respects
that kind of, like, discovery portion and highlights the things
that we can do?
Yeah.
That's a big question.
And that one's really hard.
That's, you know, convincing news orgs to switch
en masse to Blue Sky, and potentially even, like,
exclusively to Blue Sky.
First of all, the exclusivity thing isn't going to
happen because news orgs are like that.
But also, the -- you know, the more reach the
platform has, the easier it is to make this case to
news orgs.
And right now, Blue Sky's reach is not what the
commercial platform is.
That's just the long and short of it.
I think part of it is we need to increase that user
base.
And my feeling is that one way to do that is by
creating better news reading experiences.
If you create a news reading experience that, you know,
privileges people's time and doesn't kind of overwhelm them
nearly as much, that might be, like, one route
in which we can start building more traffic on, like,
AT Proto, for news consuming experiences.
What Surf's doing really, you know, excites me
because it's a way of doing something that's not just
on AT Proto, but also on Activity Pub,
and pulling together these disparate sources of content in a way
that is, like, kind of engaging, but also,
like, very, you know, respective of your mental energy
.
I really like how they have filters on Surf to hide politics
content or Elon Musk.
I think, like, yeah, I think part of it
is we need to just create better news reading experiences and people
will start gravitating towards them.
But, yeah, the question of getting news orgs onto
the platform is challenging, I think, like, yeah.
One thing I did with the news feed, like, initially
, was required that all the orgs in it have domain
verified handles.
It's called the verified news feed because I required anybody in
it -- this is before blue ticks were a thing on blue
sky -- I required them to have a domain handle.
So I could actually verify they are who they say they are
.
And I think in doing that, that pushed them to use
a primary affordance of the platform, which kind of sort
of gave -- kind of put a bit of effort to do
that.
They had to talk to their tech people to do the DNS
entry.
They had to -- you know, once you've invested that
much effort into a platform, it's, you know,
it's harder for someone to just be, like, oh
, we're not getting enough traffic from here.
Let's just, like, you know, kill that entire
account.
So, I don't know.
I think kind of encouraging news orgs to use primary afford
ance of the platform, like custom feeds, like labelers
, is one way we start to build interest kind of in
that space, I think, a little bit.
I'm not sure if I've answered your question, but
it's a bunch of scattered thoughts.
It's a problem.